---
title: The Scientific Method Is Organized Play
description: A model for understanding the scientific method.
---

The human brain is wired to experiment and collect data from the earliest age. 
Babies and toddlers engage with objects and observe that balls bounce, glass breaks, bubbles float.
These observations build an internal library of data — a stored body of remembered sensations and experiences that determine future actions.
In childhood, this activity is called *play*.

These instinctive behaviors — thought, experiment or action, observation, repetition — are really the foundations of science.
The natural elements of play create a blueprint for a more formal system of thinking about how the universe works.

This system has a name: **the scientific method**.
It's a way to keep track of ideas, measure results, and ensure that experiments can be reproduced and shared.
It is based on the human imagination, curiosity, and creativity that begins in early childhood.

However, mainstream education has organized the body of scientific knowledge into categorized subjects: chemistry, biology, and physics. 
This is not pedagogically sound; it's done because that's the only way to organize, present, and measure learning. 
And it sucks all the joy out of "science". 
The delight of scientific discovery is necessarily the last thing most educators care about.

Natural, playful, learning becomes impossible, because it comes at random natural stages for each individual, and mainstream schools are not interested in individual learning.
Chronologically paced industrial learning centers package science into structured subjects that often feel boring or even daunting, rather than inviting curiosity.
The scientific method becomes an abstract, academic mechanism that makes science more unapproachable and even less fun.
The irony is that it's just a parallel to having rules for invented games, a way to be able to share the them, and to reproduce experiments of discovery.

It's commmon to think of science as something studied and practiced only by specialists — something outside the reach and understanding of most people.
The reality is that we are all born natural scientists.
Science is just organized play.

